# Generating a changelog

Use [github-changelog-generator][1].

It's a ruby software that reads a github project event data through github's
API and generate a changelog with sections about fixed bugs (issues with the
bug tag), fixed issues, and merge PR.

:warning: **The [project
README][2] is very informative on the installation method and usage.**

[1]: https://github.com/github-changelog-generator/github-changelog-generator
[2]: https://github.com/github-changelog-generator/github-changelog-generator/blob/master/README.md

## Installation

As it is a ruby software:

    gem install github_changelog_generator

Of course, to update:

    gem update github_changelog_generator

## Usage

This is how [@iGormilhit][im] is using it, it could certainly be improved or
automated.

[im]: https://github.com/iGormilhit

### GitHub's API Token

You need to generate a *personal access token* to avoid the API's limit. You
can do that on <https://github.com/settings/tokens>.

You also need the correct permissions on the repository for which you want to
read the events through the API.

### Generating the changelog

**:warning: `github_changelog_generator` generate files in Markdown format**.
You may need to convert it to another format, such as reStructuredText.

```bash
github_changelog_generator --user rero --project rero-ils -t <token> \
 --exclude-tags stale \
 --release-branch staging \
 --future-release v0.11.0 \
 -o CHANGELOG.md
```

This will generate the `CHANGELOG.md` file for the first time (`-o
CHANGELOG.md`), for the `rero/rero-ils` project, using the user `rero`, but
with your own token. It tracks the events that happened on the `dev` branch,
specifies the name of the next release (otherwise last changes, after the last
tag, would be in an "unrealesed" section). Finally, it specifies the output
file. The `--exclude-labels stale` excludes PRs and issues labeled as `stale`
from the generated changelog.

But if you just want to add a section with the future new release, you could do
as follows:

```bash
github_changelog_generator --user rero --project rero-ils -t <token> \
 --exclude-labels stale \
 --release-branch staging \
 --future-release v0.11.0 \
 -b CHANGELOG.md -o CHANGELOG.md \
```

This command adds the `-b` parameter which specifies the already existing file
that will be expanded.

However, I do prefer to get only the changes since the last release, in an
empty file, like this:

```bash
github_changelog_generator --user rero --project rero-ils -t <token> \
 --exclude-labels stale \
 --release-branch staging \
 --future-release v0.11.0 \
 --since-tag v0.10.1 \
 -o CHANGELOG.md
```

### License and format conversion

Since in RERO projects we have a License header, for the moment I suggest to
add it manually.

As written above, in the python projects, such as `rero-ils` adding the license
is not enough, the Markdown file have to be converted into reStructuredText.
For this, `pandoc` is the Swiss knife to use.

To install `pandoc`, see [the `pandoc`
documentation](https://pandoc.org/installing.html)

To convert a Markdown file into reStructuredText:

    pandoc -t rst -o <output.rst> <input.md>
